===========================
Zope Component Architecture
===========================


:Author: Baiju M
:Version: 0.4.1
:URL: `http://www.muthukadan.net/docs/zca.pdf
       <http://www.muthukadan.net/docs/zca.pdf>`_

Copyright (C) 2007 Baiju M <baiju.m.mail AT gmail.com>.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
(at your option) any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation.

The source code in this document is subject to the provisions of the
Zope Public License, Version 2.1 (ZPL).

THE SOURCE CODE IN THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY AND ALL
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES ARE DISCLAIMED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, AGAINST
INFRINGEMENT, AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

.. note::

  Thanks to Kent Tenney (Wisconsin, USA) and Brad Allen (Dallas, USA)
  for their suggestions.


.. contents::
.. .. sectnum::


Getting started
---------------


Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Developing a large software system is always very complicated.  An
object oriented approach to analysis, design and programming has been
shown to be well suited for dealing with large systems.  Component
based design, and programming using components are becoming very
popular these days.  There are many frameworks for supporting
component based design in different languages, some are even language
neutral.  Examples of this are Microsoft's COM and Mozilla's XPCOM.

Zope Component Architecture (ZCA) is a Python framework for supporting
component based design and programming.  ZCA is very well suited to
developing large Python software systems.  ZCA is not specific to the
Zope web application server, it can be used for developing any Python
application.  Maybe it should be called the `Python Component
Architecture`.

There are two core packages related to Zope component architecture:

  - ``zope.interface`` used to define the interface of a component.

  - ``zope.component`` deals with registration and retrieval of
    components.

Zope component architecture is all about using Python objects
effectively.  Components are reusable objects with introspectable
interfaces.  A component provides an interface implemented in a class,
or any other callable object.  It doesn't matter how the component is
implemented, the important part is that it comply with its interface
contracts.  Using Zope component architecture you can spread the
complexity of systems over multiple cooperating components.  Zope
component architecture helps you to create two basic kinds of
components: `adapter` and `utility`.

Remember, ZCA is not about the components themselves, rather it is
about creating, registering, and retrieving components.  Remember
also, an `adapter` is a normal Python class (or a factory in general)
and `utility` is a normal Python callable object.

The ZCA framework is developed as part of the Zope 3 project.  ZCA, as
noted earlier, is a pure Python framework, so it can be used in any
kind of Python application.  Currently both Zope 3 and Zope 2 projects
use this framework extensively.  There are many other projects
including non-web applications using Zope Component Architecture
[#projects]_.


A brief history
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ZCA framework project began in 2001 as part of Zope 3 project.  It
grew out of lessons learned while developing large software systems
using Zope 2.  Jim Fulton was the project leader of this project.
Many people contributed to the design and implementation, including
but not limited to, Stephan Richter, Philipp von Weitershausen, Guido
van Rossum (AKA *Python BDFL*), Tres Seaver, Phillip J Eby and Martijn
Faassen.

Initially ZCA defined additional components; `services` and `views`,
but the developers came to realize that utility can replace `service`
and multi-adapter can replace `view`.  Now ZCA has a very small number
of core component types: utilities, adapters, subscribers and
handlers.  In fact, subscribers and handlers are two special types of
adapters.

During the Zope 3.2 release cycle, Jim Fulton proposed a major
simplification of ZCA [#proposal]_.  With this simplification, a new
single interface (`IComponentRegistry`) for registration of both
global and local component was created.

The ``zope.component`` package had a long list of dependencies, many
of which were not required for a non Zope 3 application.  During PyCon
2007, Jim Fulton added setuptools' `extras_require` feature to allow
separating out core ZCA functionality from add-on features [#extras]_.

Now, The ZCA project is an independent project with it's own release
cycle and Subversion repository.  However, issues and bugs are still
tracked as part of Zope 3 project [#bugs]_, and the main zope-dev list
is used for development discussions [#discussions]_.


Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``zope.component``, package together with the ``zope.interface``
package are the core of Zope component architecture.  They provide
facilities for defining, registering and looking up components.  The
``zope.component`` package and its dependencies are available in egg
format from the Python Package Index (PyPI) [#pypi]_.

You can install ``zope.component`` and it's dependencies using
`easy_install` [#easyinstall]_ ::

  $ easy_install zope.component

This command will download ``zope.component`` and its dependencies
from PyPI and install it in your Python path.

Alternately, you can download ``zope.component`` and its dependencies
from PyPI and then install them.  Install packages in the order given
below.  On Windows, you may need binary packages of ``zope.interface``
and ``zope.proxy``.

  1. ``zope.interface``
  2. ``zope.proxy``
  3. ``zope.deferredimport``
  4. ``zope.event``
  5. ``zope.deprecation``
  6. ``zope.component``

To install these packages, after downloading them, you can use
``easy_install`` command with argument as the eggs.  (You may also
give all these eggs in the same line.)::

  $ easy_install /path/to/zope.interface-3.4.x.tar.gz
  $ easy_install /path/to/zope.proxy-3.4.x.tar.gz
  ...

These methods install ZCA to the `system Python`, in the
``site-packages`` directory, which can cause problems.  In a Zope3
mailing list post, Jim Fulton recommends against using the system
Python [#systempython]_.


Experimenting with code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``virtualenv`` and ``zc.buildout`` are tools which install ZCA to an
isolated working environment.  This is a good practice for
experimenting with code, and familiarity with these tools will be
beneficial when developing and deploying applications.

You can install ``virtualenv`` using ``easy_install``::

  $ easy_install virtualenv

Then create a new environment like this::

  $ virtualenv myve

This will create a new virtual environment in the ``myve`` directory.
Now, from inside the ``myve`` directory, you can install
``zope.component`` and dependencies using ``easy_install`` inside
``myve/bin`` directory::

  $ cd myve
  $ ./bin/easy_install zope.component

Now you can import ``zope.interface`` and ``zope.component`` from the
new ``python`` interpreter inside ``myve/bin`` directory::

  $ ./bin/python

This command will give you a Python prompt which you can use to run
the code in this book.

Using ``zc.buildout`` with ``zc.recipe.egg`` recipe you can create
Python interpreter with specified Python eggs.  First, install
``zc.buildout`` using ``easy_install`` command.  (You may also do it
inside virtual environment).  To create new buildout to experiment
with Python eggs, first create a directory and initialize it using
``buildout init`` command::

  $ mkdir mybuildout
  $ cd mybuildout
  $ buildout init

Now the new ``mybuildout`` directory is a buildout.  The default
configuration file for buildout is `buildout.cfg` .  After
initializing, it will be having this content::

  [buildout]
  parts =

You can change it like this::

  [buildout]
  parts = py

  [py]
  recipe = zc.recipe.egg
  interpreter = python
  eggs = zope.component

Now run ``buildout`` command available inside ``mybuildout/bin``
directory without any argument.  This will create a new Python
interpreter inside ``mybuildout/bin`` directory::

  $ ./bin/buildout
  $ ./bin/python

This command will give you a Python prompt which you can use to run
the code in this book.

.. [#projects] http://wiki.zope.org/zope3/ComponentArchitecture
.. [#proposal] http://wiki.zope.org/zope3/LocalComponentManagementSimplification
.. [#extras] http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/setuptools#declaring-dependencies
.. [#bugs] https://bugs.launchpad.net/zope3
.. [#discussions] http://mail.zope.org/mailman/listinfo/zope-dev
.. [#pypi] Repository of Python packages: http://pypi.python.org/pypi
.. [#easyinstall] http://peak.telecommunity.com/DevCenter/EasyInstall
.. [#systempython] http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.web.zope.zope3/21045


An example
----------


Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Consider a business application for registering guests staying in a
hotel.  Python can implement this in a number of ways.  We will start
with a brief look at a procedural implementation, and then move to a
basic object oriented approach.  As we examine the object oriented
approach, we will see how we can benefit from the classic design
patterns, `adapter` and `interface`.  This will bring us into the
world of the Zope Component Architecture.


Procedural approach
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In any business application, data storage is very critical.  For
simplicity, this example use a Python dictionary as the storage.  Key
of the dictionary will be the unique Id for a particular guest.  And
value will be another dictionary with key as the property name::

  >>> guests_db = {} #key: unique Id, value: details in a dictionary

In a simplistic method, a function which accepts details as arguments
is enough to do the registration.  You also required a supporting
function to get the next Id for your data storage.

The supporting function, for getting the next Id can be implemented
like this::

  >>> def get_next_id():
  ...     db_keys = guests_db.keys()
  ...     if db_keys == []:
  ...         next_id = 1
  ...     else:
  ...         next_id = max(db_keys) + 1
  ...     return next_id

As you can see, the `get_next_id` function implementation is very
simple.  Well, this is not the ideal way, but it is sufficient to
explain concepts.  The function first get all keys of storage as list
and check whether it is empty or not.  If the list is empty, so no
item is stored, it return `1` as the next Id.  And if the list is not
empty, the next Id is calculated by adding `1` to the maximum value of
list.

The function to register guest can get next unique Id using
`get_next_id` function, then assign the details of guest using a
dictionary.  Here is the function to get details and store in the
database::

  >>> def register_guest(name, place):
  ...     next_id = get_next_id()
  ...     guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...     'name': name,
  ...     'place': place
  ...     }

We will end our discussion of the procedural approach here.
It will be much easier to add required features such as data
persistence, design flexibility, and code testability using objects.


Object oriented approach
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. ??? should this paragraph talk about "creating an object for
 handling registration" or "creating a class to handle registration"?

In object oriented methodology, you can think of a registrar object
handling the registration.  There are many advantages for creating an
object for handling registration.  Most importantly, the abstraction
provided by the registrar object makes the code easier to understand.
It offers a way to group related functionality, and can be extended
via inheritance. As features are added, such as canceling and updating
registration, the registrar object can grow to provide them, or
delegate them to another object.

Lets look at the implementation details of a registrar object
implemented as a class::

  >>> class guestRegistrar(object):
  ...
  ...     def register(self, name, place):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': name,
  ...         'place': place
  ...         }

In this implementation, the registrar object (an instance of
`GuestRegistrar` class) is handling the registration.  With this
design, a particular registrar object can perform multiple
registrations.

This is how you can use the current registrar implementation::

  >>> registrar = GuestRegistrar()
  >>> registrar.register("Jack", "Bangalore")

Requirement changes are unavoidable in any real world project.
Consider this case, after some time, a new requirement is arising: the
guests also required to provide phone number to admit them.  You will
be required to change the implementation of registrar object to
support it.

You can achieve this requirement by adding one argument to `registrar`
method and use that argument in the dictionary of values.  Here is the
new implementation for this requirement::

  >>> class GuestRegistrar(object):
  ...
  ...     def register(self, name, place, phone):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': name,
  ...         'place': place,
  ...         'phone': phone
  ...         }

Other than migrating the data to new schema, now you have to change
the usage of `GuestRegistrar` in all places.  If you can abstract the
details of guest into an object and use it for registration, the code
changes can be minimized.  If you follow this design, you have to pass
that guest object instead of more arguments to the function.  The new
implementation with guest object will look like this::

  >>> class GuestRegistrar(object):
  ...
  ...     def register(self, guest):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

Well, even in this implementation you have to change code.  Code
change for requirement is unavoidable, your goal should be to minimize
changes and make it maintainable.

.. note::

  You should have the courage to make any change, major or minor, at
  any time.  Immediate feedback is the only way you can get the
  courage.  Using automated testing, you can get the immediate
  feedback and so the courage to make changes.  For more details about
  this subject, you can read the book called `Extreme Programming
  Explained` by Kent Beck.

By introducing the guest object, you saved some typing.  More than
that, the abstraction of guest object made the system much simpler and
easy to understand.  The better understanding leads to better
restructuring and hence maintainable code.


The adapter pattern
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In a real application, as you noted earlier, the registrar object may
have cancellation and/or updation functionalities.  Suppose there are
two more methods like, `cancel_registration` and
`update_registration`.  In the new design you will be required to pass
the guest object for each methods.  You can solve this problem by
setting guest object as an attribute of registrar object.

Here is the new implementation of registrar object which set guest
object as an attribute::

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         guest = self.guest
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

The solution you reached is a common design pattern called, `Adapter`.
With this design, now you can add more methods, so more functionality,
if required.

In this implementation, while creating the instance you have to pass
the guest object which has the values as attributes.  Now you also
required to create separate instances of `GuestRegistrarNG` for each
guest object.

Now just step back and think differently.  Suppose you are the creator
of this software and selling it to many hotel customers.  Consider a
case where your different clients requires different storages.  For
example, one registrar might store the details in a relational
database and another one might store them in Zope Object Database
(ZODB).  It would be better if you can replace the registrar object
with another one which store guest details in a different way.  So, a
mechanism to change implementation based on some configuration would
be useful.

Zope component architecture provides a mechanism to replace components
based on configuration.  Using Zope component architecture you can
register components in a registry called component registry.  Later,
retrieve component based on the configuration.

The `GuestRegistrarNG` class follows, as you noted, a pattern called
`Adapter`.  The `GuestRegistrarNG` is the adapter which adapts the
guest object (adaptee).  As you can see, the adapter should contain
the component it adapts (adaptee).  This is a typical implementation
of adapter::

  >>> class Adapter(object):
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, adaptee):
  ...         self.adaptee = adaptee

Now the adapter can make use adaptee (call its methods or access
attributes).  An adapter may adapt more than one component.  Zope
component architecture provides a mechanism to effectively use these
kind of objects.  So, which component should be used will become a
matter of configuration.

This is a common scenario where you want to use different objects
doing same things, but the details may change.  There are many
situations in programming where you want to use different
implementations for same type of objects.  Here is a small list of
other common scenarios:

 - A wiki engine with support for multiple markups (STX, reST, Plain
   text, etc.)

 - An object browser which shows size of different types of objects.

 - Different types of output formats for text data (PDF, HTML etc.)

 - When developing an application for multiple clients, their
   requirements may change.  Maintaining separate code bases of the
   same application for different clients is difficult.  A better
   approach would be to create reusable components and configure them
   based on client-specific requirements.

All these examples points to situations where you want to make
applications extensible or pluggable.  Do not use `adapter`
components where you do not want extensibility or pluggability.

Zope component architecture provides `adapter` components to solve
these kinds of problems.  In fact, `GuestRegistrarNG` is an adapter
without explicit interface declaration.  This tutorial will discuss
adapters after introducing the concept of interfaces.  Interfaces are
one of the foundations of Zope components, so understanding the
concept and usage of interfaces is very important.


Interfaces
----------


Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Design Patterns` is a classic book in software engineering by the
`Gang of Four` [#patternbook]_.  In this book they recommend: "Program
to an interface, not an implementation".  Defining formal interfaces
helps you better understand system.  Moreover interface brings you all
the benefits of ZCA.

Interface define the behavior and state of objects.  An interface
describes how you work with the object.  If you like metaphor, think
of interface as a `contract for object`.  Another metaphor which may
help is `blueprint for objects`.  In the code, methods and attributes
are forming the object's interface.

The notion of interface is very explicit in modern languages like
Java, C#, VB.NET etc.  Also these languages provide some syntax for
defining interfaces.  Python has the notion interfaces, but it is not
very explicit.  To simulate a formal definition of interfaces in C++,
`Gang of Four` used classes with virtual functions in `Design
Patterns` book.  In a similar fashion, Zope component architecture use
``zope.interface.Interface`` inherited meta-class for defining an
interface.

The base of object-orientation is the communication between objects.
Messages are used for the communication between objects.  In Python,
functions, methods or any other callable can be used to handle
messages.

For example, consider this class::

  >>> class Host(object):
  ...
  ...     def goodmorning(self, name):
  ...         """Say good morning to guests"""
  ...
  ...         return "Good morning, %s!" % name

In the above class, you defined a `goodmorning` method.  If you call
the `goodmorning` method from an object created using this class, it
will return `Good morning, ...!` ::

  >>> host = Host()
  >>> host.goodmorning('Jack')
  'Good morning, Jack!'

Here ``host`` is the actual object.  The implementation details of
this object is the class ``Host``.  Now, how to find how the object
looks like, that is, what are the methods and attributes of the
object.  For this, either you have go through the implementation
details (``Host`` class) of the object or a separate API documentation
[#api]_ will be required.

You can use the ``zope.interface`` package to define the interface of
objects.  For the class given above you can specify the interface like
this::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IHost(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def goodmorning(guest):
  ...         """Say good morning to guest"""

As you can see, the interface is defined using Python class statement.
We use (abuse?) Python's class statement to define interfaces.  To
make a class an interface, it must be inherited from
``zope.interface.Interface`` .  The ``I`` prefix for interface name is
a convention.


Declaring interfaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You have already seen how to declare an interface using
``zope.interface`` in previous section.  This section will explain the
concepts in detail.

Consider this example interface::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute

  >>> class IHost(Interface):
  ...     """A host object"""
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("""Name of host""")
  ...
  ...     def goodmorning(guest):
  ...         """Say good morning to guest"""

The interface, ``IHost`` has two attributes, ``name`` and
``goodmorning``.  Recall that, at least in Python, methods are also
attributes of classes.  The ``name`` attribute is defined using
``zope.interface.Attribute`` class.  When you add the attribute
``name`` to the ``IHost`` interface, you don't set an initial value.
The purpose of defining the attribute ``name`` here is merely to
indicate that any implementation of this interface will feature an
attribute named ``name``.  In this case, you don't even say what type
of attribute it has to be!.  You can pass a documentation string as a
first argument to ``Attribute``.

The other attribute, ``goodmorning`` is a method defined using a
function definition.  Note that `self` is not required in interfaces,
because `self` is an implementation detail of class.  For example, a
module can implement this interface.  If a module implement this
interface, there will be a ``name`` attribute and ``goodmorning``
function defined.  And the ``goodmorning`` function will accept one
argument.

Now you will see how to connect `interface-class-object`.  So object
is the real living thing, objects are instances of classes.  And
interface is the actual definition of the object, so classes are just
the implementation details.  This is why you should program to an
interface and not to an implementation.

Now you should familiarize two more terms to understand other
concepts.  First one is `provide` and the other one is `implement`.
Object provides interfaces and classes implement interfaces.  In other
words, objects provide interfaces that their classes implement.  In
the above example ``host`` (object) provides ``IHost`` (interface) and
``Host`` (class) implement ``IHost`` (interface).  One object can
provide more than one interface also one class can implement more than
one interface.  Objects can also provide interfaces directly, in
addition to what their classes implement.

.. note::

  Classes are the implementation details of objects.  In Python,
  classes are callable objects, so why other callable objects can't
  implement an interface.  Yes, it is possible.  For any `callable
  object` you can declare that it produces objects that provide some
  interfaces by saying that the `callable object` implements the
  interfaces.  The `callable objects` are generally called as
  `factories`.  Since functions are callable objects, a function can
  be an `implementer` of an interface.


Implementing interfaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To declare a class implements a particular interface, use the function
``zope.interface.implements`` in the class statement.

Consider this example, here ``Host`` implements ``IHost``::

  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class Host(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IHost)
  ...
  ...     name = u''
  ...
  ...     def goodmorning(self, guest):
  ...         """Say good morning to guest"""
  ...
  ...         return "Good morning, %s!" % guest

.. note::

  If you wonder how ``implements`` function works, refer the blog post
  by James Henstridge
  (http://blogs.gnome.org/jamesh/2005/09/08/python-class-advisors/) .
  In the adapter section, you will see an ``adapts`` function, it is
  also working similarly.

Since ``Host`` implements ``IHost``, instances of ``Host`` provides
``IHost``.  There are some utility methods to introspect the
declarations.  The declaration can write outside the class also.  If
you don't write ``interface.implements(IHost)`` in the above example,
then after defining the class statement, you can write like this::

  >>> from zope.interface import classImplements
  >>> classImplements(Host, IHost)


Example revisited
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now, return to the example application.  Here you will see how to
define the interface of the registrar object::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

Here, first you imported ``Interface`` class from ``zope.interface``
module.  If you define a subclass of this ``Interface`` class, it will
be an interface from Zope component architecture point of view.  An
interface can be implemented, as you already noted, in a class or any
other callable object.

The registrar interface defined here is ``IRegistrar``.  The
documentation string for interface gives an idea about the object.  By
defining a method in the interface, you made a contract for the
component, that there will be a method with same name available.  For
the method definition interface, the first argument should not be
`self`, because an interface will never be instantiated nor will its
methods ever be called.  Instead, the interface class merely documents
what methods and attributes should appear in any normal class that
claims to implement it, and the `self` parameter is an implementation
detail which doesn't need to be documented.

As you know, an interface can also specify normal attributes::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute

  >>> class IGuest(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of guest")
  ...     place = Attribute("Place of guest")

In this interface, guest object has two attributes specified with
documentation.  An interface can also specify both attributes and
methods together.  An interface can be implemented in a class, module
or any other objects.  For example a function can dynamically create
the component and return, in this case the function is an implementer
for the interface.

Now you know what is an interface and how to define and use it.  In
the next chapter you can see how an interface is used to define an
adapter component.


Marker interfaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An interface can be used to declare that a particular object belongs
to a special type.  An interface without any attribute or method is
called `marker interface`.

Here is a `marker interface`::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class ISpecialGuest(Interface):
  ...     """A special guest"""


This interface can be used to declare an object is a special guest.


Invariants
~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes you will be required to use some rule for your component
which involve one or more normal attributes.  These kind of rule is
called `invariants`.  You can use ``zope.interface.invariant`` for
setting `invariants` for your objects in their interface.

Consider a simple example, there is a `person` object.  A person
object has `name`, `email` and `phone` attributes.  How do you
implement a validation rule that says either email or phone have to
exist, but not necessarily both.

First you have to make a callable object, either a simple function or
callable instance of a class like this::

  >>> def contacts_invariant(obj):
  ...
  ...     if not (obj.email or obj.phone):
  ...         raise Exception(
  ...             "At least one contact info is required")

Then define the `person` object's interface like this.  Use the
``zope.interface.invariant`` function to set the invariant::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import invariant

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name")
  ...     email = Attribute("Email Address")
  ...     phone = Attribute("Phone Number")
  ...
  ...     invariant(contacts_invariant)

Now use `validateInvariants` method of the interface to validate::

  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...
  ...     name = None
  ...     email = None
  ...     phone = None

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.email = u"jack@some.address.com"
  >>> IPerson.validateInvariants(jack)
  >>> jill = Person()
  >>> IPerson.validateInvariants(jill)
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  Exception: At least one contact info is required

As you can see `jack` object validated without raising any
exception. But `jill` object didn't validated the invariant
constraint, so it raised exception.

.. [#patternbook] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_Patterns
.. [#api] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface


Adapters
--------


Implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This section will describe adapters in detail.  Zope component
architecture, as you noted, helps to effectively use Python objects.
Adapter components are one of the basic components used by Zope
component architecture for effectively using Python objects.  Adapter
components are Python objects, but with well defined interface.

To declare a class is an adapter use `adapts` function defined in
``zope.component`` package.  Here is a new `GuestRegistrarNG` adapter
with explicit interface declaration::

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         guest = self.guest
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }


What you defined here is an `adapter` for `IRegistrar`, which adapts
`IGuest` object.  The `IRegistrar` interface is implemented by
`GuestRegistrarNG` class.  So, an instance of this class will provide
`IRegistrar` interface.

::

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

The `GuestRegistrarNG` is just one adapter you created, you can also
create other adapters which handles guest registration differently.


Registration
~~~~~~~~~~~~

To use this adapter component, you have to register this in a
component registry also known as site manager.  A site manager
normally resides in a site.  A site and site manager will be more
important when developing a Zope 3 application.  For now you only
required to bother about global site and global site manager ( or
component registry).  A global site manager will be in memory, but a
local site manager is persistent.

To register your component, first get the global site manager::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar, 'ng')

To get the global site manager, you have to call
``getGlobalSiteManager`` function available in ``zope.component``
package.  In fact, the global site manager is available as an
attribute (``globalSiteManager``) of ``zope.component`` package.  So,
you can directly use ``zope.component.globalSiteManager`` attribute.
To register the adapter in component, as you can see above, use
``registerAdapter`` method of component registry.  The first argument
should be your adapter class/factory.  The second argument is a tuple
of `adaptee` objects, i.e, the object which you are adapting.  In this
example, you are adapting only `IGuest` object.  The third argument is
the interface provided by the adapter component.  The fourth argument
is optional, that is the name of the particular adapter.  Since you
gave a name for this adapter, this is a `named adapter`.  If name is
not given, it will default to an empty string ('').

In the above registration, you have given the adaptee interface and
interface to be provided by the adapter.  Since you have already given
these details in adapter implementation, it is not required to specify
again.  In fact, you could have done the registration like this::

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG, name='ng')

There are some old API to do the registration, which you should avoid.
The old API functions starts with `provide`, eg: ``provideAdapter``,
``provideUtility`` etc.  While developing a Zope 3 application you can
use Zope configuration markup language (ZCML) for registration of
components.  In Zope 3, local components (persistent components) can
be registered from Zope Management Interface (ZMI) or you can do it
programmatically also.

You registered `GuestRegistrarNG` with a name `ng`.  Similarly you can
register other adapters with different names.  If a component is
registered without name, it will default to an empty string.

.. note::

  Local components are persistent components but global components are
  in memory.  Global components will be registered based on the
  configuration of application.  Local components are taken to memory
  from database while starting the application.


Querying adapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Retrieving registered components from component registry is achieved
through two functions available in ``zope.component`` package.  One of
them is ``getAdapter`` and the other is ``queryAdapter`` .  Both
functions accepts same arguments.  The ``getAdapter`` will raise
``ComponentLookupError`` if component lookup fails on the other hand
``queryAdapter`` will return `None`.

You can import the methods like this::

  >>> from zope.component import getAdapter
  >>> from zope.component import queryAdapter

In the previous section you have registered a component for guest
object (adaptee) which provides `IRegistrar` interface with name as
'ng'.  In the first section of this chapter, you have created a guest
object named `jack` .

This is how you can retrieve a component which adapts the interface of
`jack` object (`IGuest`) and provides `IRegistrar` interface also with
name as 'ng'.  Here both ``getAdapter`` and ``queryAdapter`` works
similarly::

  >>> getAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>
  >>> queryAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>

As you can see, the first argument should be adaptee then, the
interface which should be provided by component and last the name of
adapter component.

If you try to lookup the component with an name not used for
registration but for same adaptee and interface, the lookup will fail.
Here is how the two methods works in such a case::

  >>> getAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'not-exists') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  ComponentLookupError: ...
  >>> reg = queryAdapter(jack,
  ...           IRegistrar, 'not-exists') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  >>> reg is None
  True

As you can see above, ``getAdapter`` raised a ``ComponentLookupError``
exception, but ``queryAdapter`` returned `None` when lookup failed.

The third argument, the name of registration, is optional.  If the
third argument is not given it will default to empty string ('').
Since there is no component registered with an empty string,
``getAdapter`` will raise ``ComponentLookupError`` .  Similarly
``queryAdapter`` will return `None`, see yourself how it works::

  >>> getAdapter(jack, IRegistrar) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  ComponentLookupError: ...
  >>> reg = queryAdapter(jack, IRegistrar) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  >>> reg is None
  True

In this section you have learned how to register a simple adapter and
how to retrieve it from component registry.  These kind of adapters is
called single adapter, because it adapts only one adaptee.  If an
adapter adapts more that one adaptee, then it is called multi
adapter.


Retrieving adapter using interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adapters can be directly retrieved using interfaces, but it will only
work for non-named single adapters.  The first argument is the adaptee
and the second argument is a keyword argument.  If adapter lookup
fails, second argument will be returned.

  >>> IRegistrar(jack, alternate='default-output')
  'default-output'

  Keyword name can be omitted:

  >>> IRegistrar(jack, 'default-output')
  'default-output'

  If second argument is not given, it will raise `TypeError`:

  >>> IRegistrar(jack) #doctest: +NORMALIZE_WHITESPACE +ELLIPSIS
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  TypeError: ('Could not adapt',
    <Guest object at ...>,
    <InterfaceClass __builtin__.IRegistrar>)

  Here `GuestRegistrarNG` is registered without name:

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG)

  Now the adapter lookup should succeed:

  >>> IRegistrar(jack, 'default-output') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>

For simple cases, you may use interface to get adapter components.


Adapter pattern
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The adapter concept in Zope Component Architecture and the classic
`adapter pattern` as described in Design Patterns book are very
similar.  But the intent of ZCA adapter usage is more wider than the
`adapter pattern` itself.  The intent of `adapter pattern` is to
convert the interface of a class into another interface clients
expect.  This allows classes work together that couldn't otherwise
because of incompatible interfaces.  But in the `motivation` section
of Design Patterns book, GoF says: "Often the adapter is responsible
for functionality the adapted class doesn't provide".  ZCA adapter has
more focus on adding functionalities than creating a new interface for
an adapted object (adaptee).  ZCA adapter lets adapter classes extend
functionality by adding methods.  (It would be interesting to note
that `Adapter` was known as `Feature` in earlier stage of ZCA
design. ) [#feature]_

The above paragraph has a quote from Gang of Four book, it ends like
this: " ...adapted class doesn't provide".  But in the next sentence I
used "adapted object" instead of "adapted class", because GoF
describes about two variants of adapters based on implementations.
The first one is called `class adapter` and the other one is called
`object adapter`.  A class adapter uses multiple inheritance to adapt
one interface to another, on the other hand an object adapter relies
on object composition.  ZCA adapter is following object adapter
pattern, which use delegation as a mechanism for composition.  GoF's
second principle of object-oriented design goes like this: "Favor
object composition over class inheritance".  For more details about
this subject please read Design Patterns book.

The major attraction of ZCA adapter are the explicit interface for
components and the component registry.  ZCA adapter components are
registered in component registry and looked up by client objects using
interface and name when required.

.. [#feature] Thread discussing renaming of `Feature` to `Adapter`:
   http://mail.zope.org/pipermail/zope3-dev/2001-December/000008.html


Utility
-------


Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now you know the concept of interface, adapter and component registry.
Sometimes it would be useful to register an object which is not
adapting anything.  Database connection, XML parser, object returning
unique Ids etc. are examples of these kinds of objects.  These kind of
components provided by Zope component architecture are called
``utility`` components.

Utilities are just objects that provide an interface and that are
looked up by an interface and a name.  This approach creates a global
registry by which instances can be registered and accessed by
different parts of your application, with no need to pass the
instances around as parameters.

You need not to register all component instances like this.  Only
register components which you want to make replaceable.


Simple utility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before implementing the utility, as usual, define its interface.  Here
is a `greeter` interface::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

Here is a possible implementation of the above interface::

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         return "Hello " + name

You can register an instance of this class using ``registerUtility``::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, IGreeter)

In this example you registered the utility as providing the `IGreeter`
interface.  You can look the interface up with either `queryUtility`
or `getUtility`::

  >>> from zope.component import queryUtility
  >>> from zope.component import getUtility

  >>> queryUtility(IGreeter).greet('Jack')
  'Hello Jack'

  >>> getUtility(IGreeter).greet('Jack')
  'Hello Jack'

As you can see, adapters are normally classes, but utilities are
normally instances of classes.


Named utility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When registering a utility component, like adapter, you can use a
name.

For example consider this:

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, IGreeter, 'new')

In this example you registered the utility with a name as providing
the `IGreeter` interface.  You can look the interface up with either
`queryUtility` or `getUtility`::

  >>> from zope.component import queryUtility
  >>> from zope.component import getUtility

  >>> queryUtility(IGreeter, 'new').greet('Jill')
  'Hello Jill'

  >>> getUtility(IGreeter, 'new').greet('Jill')
  'Hello Jill'

As you can see here, while querying you have to use the `name` as
second argument.

.. note::

  Calling `getUtility` function without a name (second argument) is
  equivalent to calling with an empty string ('') as the name.
  Because, the default value for second (keyword) argument is an empty
  string.  Then, component lookup mechanism will try to find the
  component with name as empty string (''), and it will fail.  When
  component lookup fails it will raise `ComponentLookupError`
  exception.  Remember, it will not return some random component
  registered with some other name.


Factory
~~~~~~~

A ``Factory`` is a utility component which provides ``IFactory``
interface.

To create a factory, first define the interface of the object::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDatabase(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def getConnection():
  ...         """Return connection object"""

Here is fake implementation of `IDatabase` interface::

  >>> class FakeDb(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDatabase)
  ...
  ...     def getConnection(self):
  ...         return "connection"

You can create a factory using ``zope.component.factory.Factory``::

  >>> from zope.component.factory import Factory

  >>> factory = Factory(FakeDb, 'FakeDb')

Now you can register it like this::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IFactory
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(factory, IFactory, 'fakedb')

To use the factory, you may do it like this::

  >>> from zope.component import queryUtility
  >>> queryUtility(IFactory, 'fakedb')() #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <FakeDb object at ...>

There is a shortcut to use factory::

  >>> from zope.component import createObject
  >>> createObject('fakedb') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <FakeDb object at ...>


Advanced adapters
-----------------


Multi adapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A simple adapter normally adapts only one object, but an adapter can
adapt more than one object.  If an adapter adapts more than one
objects, it is called as multi-adapter.

::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class IAdapteeOne(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IAdapteeTwo(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IFunctionality(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class MyFunctionality(object):
  ...     implements(IFunctionality)
  ...     adapts(IAdapteeOne, IAdapteeTwo)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, one, two):
  ...         self.one = one
  ...         self.two = two

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(MyFunctionality)

  >>> class One(object):
  ...     implements(IAdapteeOne)

  >>> class Two(object):
  ...     implements(IAdapteeTwo)

  >>> one = One()
  >>> two = Two()

  >>> from zope.component import getMultiAdapter

  >>> getMultiAdapter((one,two), IFunctionality) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <MyFunctionality object at ...>

  >>> myfunctionality = getMultiAdapter((one,two), IFunctionality)
  >>> myfunctionality.one #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <One object at ...>
  >>> myfunctionality.two #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <Two object at ...>


Subscription adapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike regular adapters, subscription adapters are used when we want
all of the adapters that adapt an object to a particular interface.
Subscription adapter is also known as `subscriber`.

Consider a validation problem.  We have objects and we want to assess
whether they meet some sort of standards.  We define a validation
interface::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IValidate(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def validate(ob):
  ...         """Determine whether the object is valid
  ...
  ...         Return a string describing a validation problem.
  ...         An empty string is returned to indicate that the
  ...         object is valid.
  ...         """

Perhaps we have documents::

  >>> class IDocument(Interface):
  ...
  ...     summary = Attribute("Document summary")
  ...     body = Attribute("Document text")

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDocument)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, summary, body):
  ...         self.summary, self.body = summary, body

Now, we may want to specify various validation rules for
documents. For example, we might require that the summary be a single
line::

  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class SingleLineSummary:
  ...
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if '\n' in self.doc.summary:
  ...             return 'Summary should only have one line'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

Or we might require the body to be at least 1000 characters in length::

  >>> class AdequateLength(object):
  ...
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if len(self.doc.body) < 1000:
  ...             return 'too short'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

We can register these as subscription adapters::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(SingleLineSummary)
  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(AdequateLength)

We can then use the subscribers to validate objects::

  >>> from zope.component import subscribers

  >>> doc = Document("A\nDocument", "blah")
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['Summary should only have one line', 'too short']

  >>> doc = Document("A\nDocument", "blah" * 1000)
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['Summary should only have one line']

  >>> doc = Document("A Document", "blah")
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['too short']


Handler
~~~~~~~

Handlers are subscription adapter factories that don't produce
anything.  They do all of their work when called.  Handlers are
typically used to handle events.  Handlers are also known as event
subscribers or event subscription adapters.

Event subscribers are different from other subscription adapters in
that the caller of event subscribers doesn't expect to interact with
them in any direct way.  For example, an event publisher doesn't
expect to get any return value.  Because subscribers don't need to
provide an API to their callers, it is more natural to define them
with functions, rather than classes.  For example, in a
document-management system, we might want to record creation times for
documents::

  >>> import datetime

  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

In this example, we have a function that takes an event and performs
some processing.  It doesn't actually return anything.  This is a
special case of a subscription adapter that adapts an event to
nothing.  All of the work is done when the adapter "factory" is
called.  We call subscribers that don't actually create anything
"handlers".  There are special APIs for registering and calling them.

To register the subscriber above, we define a document-created event::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDocumentCreated(Interface):
  ...
  ...     doc = Attribute("The document that was created")

  >>> class DocumentCreated(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDocumentCreated)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc

We'll also change our handler definition to:

  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.component import adapter

  >>> @adapter(IDocumentCreated)
  ... def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

This marks the handler as an adapter of `IDocumentCreated` events.

Now we'll register the handler::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerHandler(documentCreated)

Now, if we can create an event and use the `handle` function to call
handlers registered for the event::

  >>> from zope.component import handle

  >>> handle(DocumentCreated(doc))
  >>> doc.created.__class__.__name__
  'datetime'


ZCA usage in Zope
-----------------

Zope Component Architecture is used in both Zope 3 and Zope 2.  This
chapter go through ZCA usage in Zope.


ZCML
~~~~

The Zope Configuration Markup Language (ZCML) is an XML based
configuration system for registration of components.  So, instead of
using Python API for registration, you can use ZCML.  But to use ZCML,
unfortunately, you will be required to install more dependency
packages.

To install these packages::

  $ easy_install "zope.component [zcml]"

To register an adapter::

  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <adapter
      factory=".company.EmployeeSalary"
      provides=".interfaces.ISalary"
      for=".interfaces.IEmployee"
      />

The `provides` and `for` attributes are optional, provided you have
declared it in the implementation::

  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <adapter
      factory=".company.EmployeeSalary"
      />

If you want to register the component as named adapter, you can give a
`name` attribute::


  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <adapter
      factory=".company.EmployeeSalary"
      name="salary"
      />

Utilities are also registered similarly.

To register an utility::

  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <utility
      component=".database.connection"
      provides=".interfaces.IConnection"
      />

The `provides` attribute is optional, provided you have declared it in
the implementation::

  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <utility
      component=".database.connection"
      />

If you want to register the component as named adapter, you can give a
`name` attribute::


  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <utility
      component=".database.connection"
      name="Database Connection"
      />

Instead of directly using the component, you can also give a factory::

  <configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

  <utility
      factory=".database.Connection"
      />


Overrides
~~~~~~~~~

When you register components using Python API (``register*`` methods),
the last registered component will replace previously registered
component, if both are registered with same type of arguments.  For
example, consider this example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IA(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IP(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> class AP(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IP)
  ...     adapts(IA)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, context):
  ...         self.context = context

  >>> class AP2(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IP)
  ...     adapts(IA)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, context):
  ...         self.context = context

  >>> class A(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IA)

  >>> a = A()
  >>> ap = AP(a)

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(AP)

  >>> getAdapter(a, IP) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <AP object at ...>

  If you register another adapter, the existing one will be replaced:

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(AP2)

  >>> getAdapter(a, IP) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <AP2 object at ...>

But when registering components using ZCML, the second registration
will raise a conflict error.  This is a hint for you, otherwise there
is a chance for overriding registration by mistake.  This may lead to
hard to track bugs in your system.  So, using ZCML is a win for the
application.

Sometimes you will be required to override existing registration.
ZCML provides ``includeOverrides`` directive for this.  Using this,
you can write your overrides in a separate file::

  <includeOverrides file="overrides.zcml" />


NameChooser
~~~~~~~~~~~

Location: `zope.app.container.contained.NameChooser`

This is an adapter for choosing a unique name for an object inside a
container.

The registration of adapter is like this::

  <adapter
      provides=".interfaces.INameChooser"
      for="zope.app.container.interfaces.IWriteContainer"
      factory=".contained.NameChooser"
      />

From the registration, you can see that the adaptee is a
``IWriteContainer`` and the adapter provides ``INameChooser``.

This adapter provides a very convenient functionality for Zope
programmers.  The main implementations of ``IWriteContainer`` in
Zope 3 are ``zope.app.container.BTreeContainer`` and
``zope.app.folder.Folder``.  Normally you will be inheriting from
these implementations for creating your own container classes.
Suppose there is no interface called ``INameChooser`` and
adapter, then you will be required to implement this functionality
for every implementations separately.


LocationPhysicallyLocatable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Location:
``zope.location.traversing.LocationPhysicallyLocatable``

This adapter is frequently used in Zope 3 applications, but
normally it is called through an API in ``zope.traversing.api``.
(Some old code even use ``zope.app.zapi`` functions, which is
again one more indirection)

The registration of adapter is like this::

  <adapter
      factory="zope.location.traversing.LocationPhysicallyLocatable"
      />

The interface provided and adaptee interface is given in the
implementation.

Here is the beginning of implementation::

  class LocationPhysicallyLocatable(object):
      """Provide location information for location objects
      """
      zope.component.adapts(ILocation)
      zope.interface.implements(IPhysicallyLocatable)
      ...

Normally, almost all persistent objects in Zope 3 application
will be providing the ``ILocation`` interface.  This interface
has only two attribute, ``__parent__`` and ``__name__``.  The
``__parent__`` is the parent in the location hierarchy.  And
``__name__`` is the name within the parent.

The ``IPhysicallyLocatable`` interface has four methods:
``getRoot``, ``getPath``, ``getName``, and ``getNearestSite``.

  - ``getRoot`` function will return the physical root object.

  - ``getPath`` return the physical path to the object as a
    string.

  - ``getName`` return the last segment of the physical path.

  - ``getNearestSite`` return the site the object is contained
    in.  If the object is a site, the object itself is returned.

If you learn Zope 3, you can see that these are the important
things which you required very often.  To understand the beauty
of this system, you must see how Zope 2 actually get the physical
root object and how it is implemented.  There is a method called
``getPhysicalRoot`` virtually for all container objects.


DefaultSized
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Location: ``zope.size.DefaultSized``

This adapter is just a default implementation of ``ISized`` interface.
This adapter is registered for all kind of objects.  If you want to
register this adapter for a particular interface, then you have to
override this registration for your implementation.

The registration of adapter is like this::

  <adapter
      for="*"
      factory="zope.size.DefaultSized"
      provides="zope.size.interfaces.ISized"
      permission="zope.View"
      />

As you can see, the adaptee interface is `*`, so it can adapt any kind
of objects.

The ``ISized`` is a simple interface with two method contracts::

  class ISized(Interface):

      def sizeForSorting():
          """Returns a tuple (basic_unit, amount)

          Used for sorting among different kinds of sized objects.
          'amount' need only be sortable among things that share the
          same basic unit."""

      def sizeForDisplay():
          """Returns a string giving the size.
          """

You can see another ``ISized`` adapter registered for ``IZPTPage`` in
``zope.app.zptpage`` package.


ZopeVersionUtility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Location: ``zope.app.applicationcontrol.ZopeVersionUtility``

This utility gives version of the running Zope.

The registration goes like this::

  <utility
      component=".zopeversion.ZopeVersionUtility"
      provides=".interfaces.IZopeVersion" />

The interface provided, ``IZopeVersion``, has only one method named
``getZopeVersion``.  This method return a string containing the Zope
version (possibly including SVN information).

The default implementation, ``ZopeVersionUtility``, get version info
from a file ``version.txt`` in `zope/app` directory.  If Zope is
running from subversion checkout, it will show the latest revision
number.  If none of the above works it will set it to:
`Development/Unknown`.


Reference
---------


Attribute
~~~~~~~~~

Using this class, you can define normal attribute in an interface.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `Attribute(name, doc='')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")
  ...     email = Attribute("Email Address")


Declaration
~~~~~~~~~~~

Need not to use directly.


Interface
~~~~~~~~~

Using this class, you can define an interface.  To define an
interface, just inherit from ``Interface`` class.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `Interface(name, doc='')`

Example 1::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")
  ...     email = Attribute("Email Address")


Example 2::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IHost(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def goodmorning(guest):
  ...         """Say good morning to guest"""


adapts
~~~~~~

This function helps to declare adapter classes.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `adapts(*interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }


alsoProvides
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declare interfaces declared directly for an object.  The arguments
after the object are one or more interfaces.  The interfaces given are
added to the interfaces previously declared for the object.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `alsoProvides(object, *interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.interface import alsoProvides

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"
  >>> jack.college = "New College"
  >>> alsoProvides(jack, IStudent)

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IStudent in providedBy(jack)
  True


classImplements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declare additional interfaces implemented for instances of a class.
The arguments after the class are one or more interfaces.  The
interfaces given are added to any interfaces previously declared.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `classImplements(cls, *interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.interface import classImplements

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     name = u""
  ...     college = u""

  >>> classImplements(Person, IStudent)
  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"
  >>> jack.college = "New College"

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IStudent in providedBy(jack)
  True


classImplementsOnly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declare the only interfaces implemented by instances of a class.  The
arguments after the class are one or more interfaces.  The interfaces
given replace any previous declarations.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `classImplementsOnly(cls, *interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.interface import classImplementsOnly

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     college = u""

  >>> classImplementsOnly(Person, IStudent)
  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.college = "New College"

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(jack)
  False
  >>> IStudent in providedBy(jack)
  True


classProvides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Normally if a class implements a particular interface, the instance of
that class will provide the interface implemented by that class.  But
if you want a class to be provided by an interface, you can declare it
using ``classProvides`` function.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `classProvides(*interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import classProvides

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     classProvides(IPerson)
  ...     name = u"Jack"

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(Person)
  True


ComponentLookupError
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


createObject
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create an object using a factory.

Finds the named factory in the current site and calls it with the
given arguments.  If a matching factory cannot be found raises
ComponentLookupError.  Returns the created object.

A context keyword argument can be provided to cause the factory to be
looked up in a location other than the current site.  (Of course, this
means that it is impossible to pass a keyword argument named "context"
to the factory.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `createObject(factory_name, *args, **kwargs)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDatabase(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def getConnection():
  ...         """Return connection object"""

  >>> class FakeDb(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDatabase)
  ...
  ...     def getConnection(self):
  ...         return "connection"

  >>> from zope.component.factory import Factory

  >>> factory = Factory(FakeDb, 'FakeDb')

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IFactory
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(factory, IFactory, 'fakedb')

  >>> from zope.component import createObject
  >>> createObject('fakedb') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <FakeDb object at ...>


directlyProvidedBy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This function will return the interfaces directly provided by the
given object.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `directlyProvidedBy(object)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class ISmartPerson(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = u"Jack"
  >>> jack.college = "New College"
  >>> alsoProvides(jack, ISmartPerson, IStudent)

  >>> from zope.interface import directlyProvidedBy

  >>> jack_dp = directlyProvidedBy(jack)
  >>> IPerson in jack_dp.interfaces()
  False
  >>> IStudent in jack_dp.interfaces()
  True
  >>> ISmartPerson in jack_dp.interfaces()
  True


directlyProvides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declare interfaces declared directly for an object.  The arguments
after the object are one or more interfaces.  The interfaces given
replace interfaces previously declared for the object.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `directlyProvides(object, *interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class ISmartPerson(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = u"Jack"
  >>> jack.college = "New College"
  >>> alsoProvides(jack, ISmartPerson, IStudent)

  >>> from zope.interface import directlyProvidedBy

  >>> jack_dp = directlyProvidedBy(jack)
  >>> ISmartPerson in jack_dp.interfaces()
  True
  >>> IPerson in jack_dp.interfaces()
  False
  >>> IStudent in jack_dp.interfaces()
  True
  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy

  >>> ISmartPerson in providedBy(jack)
  True

  >>> from zope.interface import directlyProvides
  >>> directlyProvides(jack, IStudent)

  >>> jack_dp = directlyProvidedBy(jack)
  >>> ISmartPerson in jack_dp.interfaces()
  False
  >>> IPerson in jack_dp.interfaces()
  False
  >>> IStudent in jack_dp.interfaces()
  True

  >>> ISmartPerson in providedBy(jack)
  False


getAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~

Get a named adapter to an interface for an object.  Returns an adapter
that can adapt object to interface.  If a matching adapter cannot be
found, raises ``ComponentLookupError`` .

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `getAdapter(object, interface=Interface, name=u'', context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar, 'ng')

  >>> getAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>


getAdapterInContext
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instead of this function, use `context` argument of `getAdapter`_
function.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getAdapterInContext(object, interface, context)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.component.globalregistry import BaseGlobalComponents
  >>> from zope.component import IComponentLookup
  >>> sm = BaseGlobalComponents()

  >>> class Context(object):
  ...     def __init__(self, sm):
  ...         self.sm = sm
  ...     def __conform__(self, interface):
  ...         if interface.isOrExtends(IComponentLookup):
  ...             return self.sm

  >>> context = Context(sm)

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> sm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar)

  >>> from zope.component import getAdapterInContext
  >>> from zope.component import queryAdapterInContext

  >>> getAdapterInContext(jack, IRegistrar, sm) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>


getAdapters
~~~~~~~~~~~

Look for all matching adapters to a provided interface for objects.
Return a list of adapters that match. If an adapter is named, only the
most specific adapter of a given name is returned.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getAdapters(objects, provided, context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG, name='ng')

  >>> from zope.component import getAdapters
  >>> list(getAdapters((jack,), IRegistrar)) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  [(u'ng', <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>)]


getAllUtilitiesRegisteredFor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return all registered utilities for an interface.  This includes
overridden utilities.  The returned value is an iterable of utility
instances.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getAllUtilitiesRegisteredFor(interface)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         print "Hello", name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, IGreeter)

  >>> from zope.component import getAllUtilitiesRegisteredFor

  >>> getAllUtilitiesRegisteredFor(IGreeter) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  [<Greeter object at ...>]


getFactoriesFor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return a tuple (name, factory) of registered factories that create
objects which implement the given interface.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getFactoriesFor(interface, context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDatabase(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def getConnection():
  ...         """Return connection object"""

  >>> class FakeDb(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDatabase)
  ...
  ...     def getConnection(self):
  ...         return "connection"

  >>> from zope.component.factory import Factory

  >>> factory = Factory(FakeDb, 'FakeDb')

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IFactory
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(factory, IFactory, 'fakedb')

  >>> from zope.component import getFactoriesFor

  >>> list(getFactoriesFor(IDatabase))
  [(u'fakedb', <Factory for <class 'FakeDb'>>)]


getFactoryInterfaces
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get interfaces implemented by a factory.  Finds the factory of the
given name that is nearest to the context, and returns the interface
or interface tuple that object instances created by the named factory
will implement.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getFactoryInterfaces(name, context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDatabase(Interface):
  ...
  ...     def getConnection():
  ...         """Return connection object"""

  >>> class FakeDb(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDatabase)
  ...
  ...     def getConnection(self):
  ...         return "connection"

  >>> from zope.component.factory import Factory

  >>> factory = Factory(FakeDb, 'FakeDb')

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> from zope.component.interfaces import IFactory
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(factory, IFactory, 'fakedb')

  >>> from zope.component import getFactoryInterfaces

  >>> getFactoryInterfaces('fakedb')
  <implementedBy __builtin__.FakeDb>


getGlobalSiteManager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return the global site manager.  This function should never fail and
always return an object that provides `IGlobalSiteManager`

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getGlobalSiteManager()`

Example::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> from zope.component import globalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm is globalSiteManager
  True


getMultiAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look for a multi-adapter to an interface for an objects.  Returns a
multi-adapter that can adapt objects to interface.  If a matching
adapter cannot be found, raises ComponentLookupError.  The name
consisting of an empty string is reserved for unnamed adapters. The
unnamed adapter methods will often call the named adapter methods with
an empty string for a name.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getMultiAdapter(objects, interface=Interface, name='',
   context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class IAdapteeOne(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IAdapteeTwo(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IFunctionality(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class MyFunctionality(object):
  ...     implements(IFunctionality)
  ...     adapts(IAdapteeOne, IAdapteeTwo)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, one, two):
  ...         self.one = one
  ...         self.two = two

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(MyFunctionality)

  >>> class One(object):
  ...     implements(IAdapteeOne)

  >>> class Two(object):
  ...     implements(IAdapteeTwo)

  >>> one = One()
  >>> two = Two()

  >>> from zope.component import getMultiAdapter

  >>> getMultiAdapter((one,two), IFunctionality) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <MyFunctionality object at ...>

  >>> myfunctionality = getMultiAdapter((one,two), IFunctionality)
  >>> myfunctionality.one #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <One object at ...>
  >>> myfunctionality.two #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <Two object at ...>


getSiteManager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get the nearest site manager in the given context.  If `context` is
`None`, return the global site manager.  If the `context` is not
`None`, it is expected that an adapter from the `context` to
`IComponentLookup` can be found.  If no adapter is found, a
`ComponentLookupError` is raised.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getSiteManager(context=None)`

Example 1::

  >>> from zope.component.globalregistry import BaseGlobalComponents
  >>> from zope.component import IComponentLookup
  >>> sm = BaseGlobalComponents()

  >>> class Context(object):
  ...     def __init__(self, sm):
  ...         self.sm = sm
  ...     def __conform__(self, interface):
  ...         if interface.isOrExtends(IComponentLookup):
  ...             return self.sm

  >>> context = Context(sm)

  >>> from zope.component import getSiteManager

  >>> lsm = getSiteManager(context)
  >>> lsm is sm
  True

Example 2::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> sm = getSiteManager()
  >>> gsm is sm
  True


getUtilitiesFor
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look up the registered utilities that provide an interface.  Returns
an iterable of name-utility pairs.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getUtilitiesFor(interface)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         print "Hello", name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, IGreeter)

  >>> from zope.component import getUtilitiesFor

  >>> list(getUtilitiesFor(IGreeter)) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  [(u'', <Greeter object at ...>)]


getUtility
~~~~~~~~~~

Get the utility that provides interface.  Returns the nearest utility
to the context that implements the specified interface.  If one is not
found, raises ComponentLookupError.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `getUtility(interface, name='', context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         return "Hello " + name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, IGreeter)

  >>> from zope.component import getUtility

  >>> getUtility(IGreeter).greet('Jack')
  'Hello Jack'


handle
~~~~~~

Call all of the handlers for the given objects.  Handlers are
subscription adapter factories that don't produce anything.  They do
all of their work when called.  Handlers are typically used to handle
events.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `handle(*objects)`

Example::

  >>> import datetime

  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDocumentCreated(Interface):
  ...     doc = Attribute("The document that was created")

  >>> class DocumentCreated(object):
  ...     implements(IDocumentCreated)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc


  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.component import adapter

  >>> @adapter(IDocumentCreated)
  ... def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()


  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerHandler(documentCreated)

  >>> from zope.component import handle

  >>> handle(DocumentCreated(doc))
  >>> doc.created.__class__.__name__
  'datetime'


implementedBy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return the interfaces implemented for a class' instances.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `implementedBy(class_)`

Example 1::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         print "Hello", name

  >>> from zope.interface import implementedBy
  >>> implementedBy(Greeter)
  <implementedBy __builtin__.Greeter>

Example 2::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class ISpecial(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> from zope.interface import classImplements
  >>> classImplements(Person, ISpecial)

  >>> from zope.interface import implementedBy

  To get a list of all interfaces implemented by that class::

  >>> [x.__name__ for x in implementedBy(Person)]
  ['IPerson', 'ISpecial']


implementer
~~~~~~~~~~~

Create a decorator for declaring interfaces implemented by a factory.
A callable is returned that makes an implements declaration on objects
passed to it.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `implementer(*interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import implementer
  >>> class IFoo(Interface):
  ...     pass
  >>> class Foo(object):
  ...     implements(IFoo)

  >>> @implementer(IFoo)
  ... def foocreator():
  ...     foo = Foo()
  ...     return foo
  >>> list(implementedBy(foocreator))
  [<InterfaceClass __builtin__.IFoo>]


implements
~~~~~~~~~~

Declare interfaces implemented by instances of a class This function
is called in a class definition.  The arguments are one or more
interfaces.  The interfaces given are added to any interfaces
previously declared.  Previous declarations include declarations for
base classes unless implementsOnly was used.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `implements(*interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(jack)
  True

implementsOnly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declare the only interfaces implemented by instances of a class.  This
function is called in a class definition.  The arguments are one or
more interfaces.  Previous declarations including declarations for
base classes are overridden.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `implementsOnly(*interfaces)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.interface import implementsOnly

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> class NewPerson(Person):
  ...     implementsOnly(IStudent)
  ...     college = u""

  >>> jack = NewPerson()
  >>> jack.college = "New College"

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(jack)
  False
  >>> IStudent in providedBy(jack)
  True


moduleProvides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Declare interfaces provided by a module.  This function is used in a
module definition.  The arguments are one or more interfaces.  The
given interfaces are used to create the module's direct-object
interface specification.  An error will be raised if the module
already has an interface specification.  In other words, it is an
error to call this function more than once in a module definition.

This function is provided for convenience. It provides a more
convenient way to call directlyProvides for a module.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `moduleProvides(*interfaces)`


noLongerProvides
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Remove an interface from the list of an object's directly provided
interfaces.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `noLongerProvides(object, interface)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.interface import classImplements

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class IStudent(Interface):
  ...
  ...     college = Attribute("Name of college")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"
  >>> jack.college = "New College"
  >>> directlyProvides(jack, IStudent)

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(jack)
  True
  >>> IStudent in providedBy(jack)
  True
  >>> from zope.interface import noLongerProvides
  >>> noLongerProvides(jack, IStudent)
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(jack)
  True
  >>> IStudent in providedBy(jack)
  False


provideAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommend to use `registerAdapter`_ .


provideHandler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommend to use `registerHandler`_ .


provideSubscriptionAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommend to use `registerSubscriptionAdapter`_ .


provideUtility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommend to use `registerUtility`_ .


providedBy
~~~~~~~~~~

Test whether the interface is implemented by the object. Return true
if the object asserts that it implements the interface, including
asserting that it implements an extended interface.

 - Location: ``zope.interface``

 - Signature: `providedBy(object)`

Example 1::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"

  You can test it like this:

  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> IPerson in providedBy(jack)
  True

Example 2::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IPerson(Interface):
  ...     name = Attribute("Name of person")

  >>> class ISpecial(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class Person(object):
  ...     implements(IPerson)
  ...     name = u""

  >>> from zope.interface import classImplements
  >>> classImplements(Person, ISpecial)
  >>> from zope.interface import providedBy
  >>> jack = Person()
  >>> jack.name = "Jack"

  To get a list of all interfaces provided by that object::

  >>> [x.__name__ for x in providedBy(jack)]
  ['IPerson', 'ISpecial']


queryAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look for a named adapter to an interface for an object.  Returns an
adapter that can adapt object to interface.  If a matching adapter
cannot be found, returns the default.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `queryAdapter(object, interface=Interface, name=u'',
   default=None, context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar, 'ng')

  >>> queryAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>


queryAdapterInContext
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instead of this function, use `context` argument of `queryAdapter`_
function.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `queryAdapterInContext(object, interface, context,
   default=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.component.globalregistry import BaseGlobalComponents
  >>> from zope.component import IComponentLookup
  >>> sm = BaseGlobalComponents()

  >>> class Context(object):
  ...     def __init__(self, sm):
  ...         self.sm = sm
  ...     def __conform__(self, interface):
  ...         if interface.isOrExtends(IComponentLookup):
  ...             return self.sm

  >>> context = Context(sm)

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> sm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar)

  >>> from zope.component import getAdapterInContext
  >>> from zope.component import queryAdapterInContext

  >>> queryAdapterInContext(jack, IRegistrar, sm) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>


queryMultiAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look for a multi-adapter to an interface for objects.  Returns a
multi-adapter that can adapt objects to interface.  If a matching
adapter cannot be found, returns the default.  The name consisting of
an empty string is reserved for unnamed adapters.  The unnamed adapter
methods will often call the named adapter methods with an empty string
for a name.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `queryMultiAdapter(objects, interface=Interface,
   name=u'', default=None, context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class IAdapteeOne(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IAdapteeTwo(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class IFunctionality(Interface):
  ...     pass

  >>> class MyFunctionality(object):
  ...     implements(IFunctionality)
  ...     adapts(IAdapteeOne, IAdapteeTwo)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, one, two):
  ...         self.one = one
  ...         self.two = two

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(MyFunctionality)

  >>> class One(object):
  ...     implements(IAdapteeOne)

  >>> class Two(object):
  ...     implements(IAdapteeTwo)

  >>> one = One()
  >>> two = Two()

  >>> from zope.component import queryMultiAdapter

  >>> getMultiAdapter((one,two), IFunctionality) #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <MyFunctionality object at ...>

  >>> myfunctionality = queryMultiAdapter((one,two), IFunctionality)
  >>> myfunctionality.one #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <One object at ...>
  >>> myfunctionality.two #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <Two object at ...>


queryUtility
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look up a utility that provides an interface.  If one is not found,
returns default.

 - Location: ``zope.component``

 - Signature: `queryUtility(interface, name='', default=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         return "Hello " + name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, IGreeter)

  >>> from zope.component import queryUtility

  >>> queryUtility(IGreeter).greet('Jack')
  'Hello Jack'


registerAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Register an adapter factory.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registerAdapter(factory, required=None, provided=None,
   name=u'', info=u'')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar, 'ng')

  You can test it like this:

  >>> queryAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>


registeredAdapters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return an iterable of `IAdapterRegistrations`.  These registrations
describe the current adapter registrations in the object.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registeredAdapters()`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar, 'ng2')


  >>> reg_adapter = list(gsm.registeredAdapters())
  >>> 'ng2' in [x.name for x in reg_adapter]
  True


registeredHandlers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return an iterable of `IHandlerRegistrations`.  These registrations
describe the current handler registrations in the object.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registeredHandlers()`

Example::

  >>> import datetime

  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDocumentCreated(Interface):
  ...     doc = Attribute("The document that was created")

  >>> class DocumentCreated(object):
  ...     implements(IDocumentCreated)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc


  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.component import adapter

  >>> @adapter(IDocumentCreated)
  ... def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()


  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerHandler(documentCreated, info='ng3')

  >>> reg_adapter = list(gsm.registeredHandlers())
  >>> 'ng3' in [x.info for x in reg_adapter]
  True

  >>> gsm.registerHandler(documentCreated, name='ng4')
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  TypeError: Named handlers are not yet supported


registeredSubscriptionAdapters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return an iterable of `ISubscriptionAdapterRegistrations`.  These
registrations describe the current subscription adapter registrations
in the object.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registeredSubscriptionAdapters()`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IValidate(Interface):
  ...     def validate(ob):
  ...         """Determine whether the object is valid
  ...
  ...         Return a string describing a validation problem.
  ...         An empty string is returned to indicate that the
  ...         object is valid.
  ...         """

  >>> class IDocument(Interface):
  ...     summary = Attribute("Document summary")
  ...     body = Attribute("Document text")

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...     implements(IDocument)
  ...     def __init__(self, summary, body):
  ...         self.summary, self.body = summary, body

  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class AdequateLength(object):
  ...
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if len(self.doc.body) < 1000:
  ...             return 'too short'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(AdequateLength, info='ng4')

  >>> reg_adapter = list(gsm.registeredSubscriptionAdapters())
  >>> 'ng4' in [x.info for x in reg_adapter]
  True


registeredUtilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Return an iterable of `IUtilityRegistrations` .  These registrations
describe the current utility registrations in the object.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registeredUtilities()`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         print "Hello", name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet, info='ng5')

  >>> reg_adapter = list(gsm.registeredUtilities())
  >>> 'ng5' in [x.info for x in reg_adapter]
  True


registerHandler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Register a handler.  A handler is a subscriber that doesn't compute an
adapter but performs some function when called.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registerHandler(handler, required=None, name=u'', info='')`

In the current implementation of ``zope.component`` doesn't support
`name` attribute.

Example::

  >>> import datetime

  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDocumentCreated(Interface):
  ...     doc = Attribute("The document that was created")

  >>> class DocumentCreated(object):
  ...     implements(IDocumentCreated)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc


  >>> def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()

  >>> from zope.component import adapter

  >>> @adapter(IDocumentCreated)
  ... def documentCreated(event):
  ...     event.doc.created = datetime.datetime.utcnow()


  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerHandler(documentCreated)

  >>> from zope.component import handle

  >>> handle(DocumentCreated(doc))
  >>> doc.created.__class__.__name__
  'datetime'


registerSubscriptionAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Register a subscriber factory.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registerSubscriptionAdapter(factory, required=None,
   provides=None, name=u'', info='')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IValidate(Interface):
  ...     def validate(ob):
  ...         """Determine whether the object is valid
  ...
  ...         Return a string describing a validation problem.
  ...         An empty string is returned to indicate that the
  ...         object is valid.
  ...         """

  >>> class IDocument(Interface):
  ...     summary = Attribute("Document summary")
  ...     body = Attribute("Document text")

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...     implements(IDocument)
  ...     def __init__(self, summary, body):
  ...         self.summary, self.body = summary, body

  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class AdequateLength(object):
  ...
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if len(self.doc.body) < 1000:
  ...             return 'too short'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(AdequateLength)


registerUtility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Register a utility.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `registerUtility(component, provided=None, name=u'',
   info=u'')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         print "Hello", name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet)


subscribers
~~~~~~~~~~~

Get subscribers.  Subscribers are returned that provide the provided
interface and that depend on and are computed from the sequence of
required objects.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `subscribers(required, provided, context=None)`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IValidate(Interface):
  ...     def validate(ob):
  ...         """Determine whether the object is valid
  ...
  ...         Return a string describing a validation problem.
  ...         An empty string is returned to indicate that the
  ...         object is valid.
  ...         """

  >>> class IDocument(Interface):
  ...     summary = Attribute("Document summary")
  ...     body = Attribute("Document text")

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...     implements(IDocument)
  ...     def __init__(self, summary, body):
  ...         self.summary, self.body = summary, body

  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class SingleLineSummary:
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if '\n' in self.doc.summary:
  ...             return 'Summary should only have one line'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

  >>> class AdequateLength(object):
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if len(self.doc.body) < 1000:
  ...             return 'too short'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(SingleLineSummary)
  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(AdequateLength)

  >>> from zope.component import subscribers

  >>> doc = Document("A\nDocument", "blah")
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['Summary should only have one line', 'too short']

  >>> doc = Document("A\nDocument", "blah" * 1000)
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['Summary should only have one line']

  >>> doc = Document("A Document", "blah")
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['too short']


unregisterAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Register an adapter factory.  A boolean is returned indicating whether
the registry was changed.  If the given component is None and there is
no component registered, or if the given component is not None and is
not registered, then the function returns False, otherwise it returns
True.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `unregisterAdapter(factory=None, required=None,
   provided=None, name=u'')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import Interface

  >>> class IRegistrar(Interface):
  ...     """A registrar will register object's details"""
  ...
  ...     def register():
  ...         """Register object's details"""
  ...

  >>> from zope.interface import implements
  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class GuestRegistrarNG(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IRegistrar)
  ...     adapts(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, guest):
  ...         self.guest = guest
  ...
  ...     def register(self):
  ...         next_id = get_next_id()
  ...         guests_db[next_id] = {
  ...         'name': guest.name,
  ...         'place': guest.place,
  ...         'phone': guest.phone
  ...         }

  >>> class Guest(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGuest)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, name, place):
  ...         self.name = name
  ...         self.place = place

  >>> jack = Guest("Jack", "Bangalore")
  >>> jack_registrar = GuestRegistrarNG(jack)

  >>> IRegistrar.providedBy(jack_registrar)
  True

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> gsm.registerAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG,
  ...                     (IGuest,), IRegistrar, 'ng6')

  You can test it like this:

  >>> queryAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng6') #doctest: +ELLIPSIS
  <GuestRegistrarNG object at ...>

  Now unregister:

  >>> gsm.unregisterAdapter(GuestRegistrarNG, name='ng6')
  True

  After unregistration:

  >>> print queryAdapter(jack, IRegistrar, 'ng6')
  None


unregisterHandler
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unregister a handler.  A handler is a subscriber that doesn't compute
an adapter but performs some function when called.  A boolean is
returned indicating whether the registry was changed.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `unregisterHandler(handler=None, required=None,
   name=u'')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IDocument(Interface):
  ...
  ...     summary = Attribute("Document summary")
  ...     body = Attribute("Document text")

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IDocument)
  ...     def __init__(self, summary, body):
  ...         self.summary, self.body = summary, body

  >>> doc = Document("A\nDocument", "blah")

  >>> class IDocumentAccessed(Interface):
  ...     doc = Attribute("The document that was accessed")

  >>> class DocumentAccessed(object):
  ...     implements(IDocumentAccessed)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...         self.doc.count = 0

  >>> from zope.component import adapter

  >>> @adapter(IDocumentAccessed)
  ... def documentAccessed(event):
  ...     event.doc.count = event.doc.count + 1

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerHandler(documentAccessed)

  >>> from zope.component import handle

  >>> handle(DocumentAccessed(doc))
  >>> doc.count
  1

  Now unregister:

  >>> gsm.unregisterHandler(documentAccessed)
  True

  After unregistration:

  >>> handle(DocumentAccessed(doc))
  >>> doc.count
  0


unregisterSubscriptionAdapter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unregister a subscriber factory.  A boolean is returned indicating
whether the registry was changed.  If the given component is None and
there is no component registered, or if the given component is not
None and is not registered, then the function returns False, otherwise
it returns True.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `unregisterSubscriptionAdapter(factory=None,
   required=None, provides=None, name=u'')`


Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import Attribute
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IValidate(Interface):
  ...     def validate(ob):
  ...         """Determine whether the object is valid
  ...
  ...         Return a string describing a validation problem.
  ...         An empty string is returned to indicate that the
  ...         object is valid.
  ...         """

  >>> class IDocument(Interface):
  ...     summary = Attribute("Document summary")
  ...     body = Attribute("Document text")

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...     implements(IDocument)
  ...     def __init__(self, summary, body):
  ...         self.summary, self.body = summary, body

  >>> from zope.component import adapts

  >>> class AdequateLength(object):
  ...
  ...     adapts(IDocument)
  ...     implements(IValidate)
  ...
  ...     def __init__(self, doc):
  ...         self.doc = doc
  ...
  ...     def validate(self):
  ...         if len(self.doc.body) < 1000:
  ...             return 'too short'
  ...         else:
  ...             return ''

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> gsm.registerSubscriptionAdapter(AdequateLength)

  >>> from zope.component import subscribers

  >>> doc = Document("A\nDocument", "blah")
  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  ['too short']

  Now unregister:

  >>> gsm.unregisterSubscriptionAdapter(AdequateLength)
  True

  After unregistration:

  >>> [adapter.validate()
  ...  for adapter in subscribers([doc], IValidate)
  ...  if adapter.validate()]
  []


unregisterUtility
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unregister a utility.  A boolean is returned indicating whether the
registry was changed.  If the given component is None and there is no
component registered, or if the given component is not None and is not
registered, then the function returns False, otherwise it returns
True.

 - Location: ``zope.component - IComponentRegistry``

 - Signature: `unregisterUtility(component=None, provided=None,
   name=u'')`

Example::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> from zope.interface import implements

  >>> class IGreeter(Interface):
  ...     def greet(name):
  ...         "say hello"

  >>> class Greeter(object):
  ...
  ...     implements(IGreeter)
  ...
  ...     def greet(self, name):
  ...         return "Hello " + name

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> gsm = getGlobalSiteManager()

  >>> greet = Greeter()
  >>> gsm.registerUtility(greet)

  >>> queryUtility(IGreeter).greet('Jack')
  'Hello Jack'

  Now unregister:

  >>> gsm.unregisterUtility(greet)
  True

  After unregistration:

  >>> print queryUtility(IGreeter)
  None
